

# Objective
Once initial datasets are obtained from the Data Collection Project, algorithm development can begin in parallel with continued data collection. Results from this project will directly impact iterative modifications to the data collection protocol, such as adding or removing different sensors, body locations, etc, based on insights from the algorithm exploration. The ultimate goal of this phase is to identify both the minimum set of signals and the algorithms needed to achieve the sleep tracking accuracy required for our use cases. 

# Phases

## Phase 1: Research and Planning
Phase 1 will be a technical deep dive into patents, academic publications, and other resources for understanding the current state-of-the-art in sleep tracking algorithm. It will also be where we establish the metrics that we want to achieve in our algorithm, such as accuracy, resolution, and latency, as well as the initial set of algorithms that we want to explore.


## Phase 2: Data Processing Infrastructure
Phase 2 will be where the initial infrastructure for processing data is established. This will be a python-based application built on pandas for fast and flexible computational analysis. We will start with building out tools for loading the data, conversion/pre-processing, and viewing the data. 


## Phase 3: Feature Extraction
One of the first steps in this phase will be feature extraction from the raw and processed signals, which can be used in many different algorithms. This involves signal processing, generating derived signals, converting to epochs, and then generating features from the signals withing each epoch. Composite and derived features can also be generated by combining operations on 2 or more singular features. 


## Phase 4: Algorithm Exploration

Phase 4 will begin the exploration of data processing and algorithm development  to detect and label the targeted sleep states from our collected sensor data and extracted features, and that of the reference devices. A reference device will be needed to compare the accuracy of our algorithms against what we consider to be ground truth, and various metrics such as latency, accuracy, sensitivity and selectivity will need to be generated for each algorithm tested. 


## Phase 5: Algorithm Refinement and Selection
This phase begins when we have honed in on 1 or more algorithms that meet our requirements. Here we begin to optimize the algorithm to gain further improvements in any of the metrics, as well as optimize processing efficiency. Based on the complexity of the algorithm, we will determine the options for the algorithm can run such as on-device, in Hatch's Restore products, or in the cloud. 


## Phase 5: Algorithm API Deployment
A pre-production deployment of the algorithm with an API so that the rest of the development team can validate it in real-time usage, and begin testing the application use cases for the real-time sleep feedback. 